# photoswitching
A hidden Markov model approach to characterizing the photoswitching behaviour of fluorophores 

The main purpose of this code is to provide Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates for photo-switching parameters when working with Super-Resolution Imaging Data. 
We firstly assume that the data entered is an N by M binary matrix which for simplicity, we will call DATA. Here, each COLUMN is an independent realisation of the imaging process of an individual fluorophore and is of length N (total number of frames). We further assume that there are M (number of fluorophores) columns being INDEPENDENTLY imaged. We need the data to be binary, so DATA(i,j) = 1 implies that the jth fluorophore has been localised in the ith frame and Data(i,j) = 0 implies no localisation of this same fluorophore. 
Notes: this program will automatically fail if the data entered is not binary. 
For the program to work, the number of frames sampled per second (which we call 'frames') during the experiment, will also need to be provided. 

This program is able to estimate photo-switching parameters (this includes transition rates, absorption/bleached rates and estimates for noise parameters) from a set of candidate models. The basic set of models includes 1 ON/BRIGHT state, m+1 DARK states and 1 permanently-DARK/photo-bleached state. 
These models are characterised by the term 'm' which when 0 denotes the model of 1 DARK state, when 1 denotes the model of 2 DARK states and when 2 denotes the model of 3 DARK states. Users are directed to our paper *CITE* for more details on the models. 
Users can also specify with the binary input 'model' by which of the m+2 transient states (in the order 0_0, 0_1, ... 0_m, 1), the permanently-DARK/photo-bleached state can be reached from. For example, when m=1 and photo-bleaching can only be accessed from the ON/BRIGHT state, the model the user will input would be 'm=1' and 'model = [0 0 1]'. More uses of this can be found in the example_to_test.m file. 
Depending on the type of data inputted, users are allowed to specify whether there may be false positive observations within the dataset. In this case, users input a '1' for the term 'FPR' and the false positive rate (FPR) can be estimated. If there are no false positive observations, a '0' can be inputted.
Depending on the type of experiment conducted, users are allowed to specify whether the initial probability mass of hidden states (in the order 0_0, 0_1, ..., 0_m, 1, 2 at time 0) is known/unknown to them when gaining the data. In the former case, the program allows for the initial probability mass (in the form of the vector 'nu') to be entered and in the latter, allows for the mass 'nu' to be estimated. When entering the mass when it is known, the vector should be of length m+3 and the last element zero as it is assumed that there is no initial probability mass over the permanently-DARK/photo-bleached state and any columns of observations which do not have at least one observation of the fluorophore are automatically removed from the dataset. For example, for experiments conducted when all fluorophores start in the bright state, (e.g. in the case m=2) nu can be entered as nu = [0 0 0 1 0]. 

The function that executes the above is called 'likelihood_preds_m.m' and is self-contained. It is not only able to estimate photo-switching parameters for given m, but also is able to report both the AIC and BIC. Users are advised (in the case of unknown m) to fit all models (m=0,1,2) and select the model with the lowest AIC/BIC. The BIC is preferred for larger datasets.  
Users are in the first instance, directed to the file 'example_to_test.m' for two examples with two simulated datasets of the usage of this program. 
